
<div class="track_article_contents__9JJFV"><h1 class="track_title__g20mM">Union</h1><hr><div class="track_body__GeGQu"><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Introduction</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Set Theory Clauses in SQL draw their origins from mathematical set theory, offering ways to manipulate sets of data records. One of the most useful and versatile set operations in SQL is the UNION operator. Understanding UNION can be a game-changer for those who need to deal with different datasets that have shared characteristics. This article aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of the UNION operation in SQL.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>What is a Union?</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Definition</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>The UNION clause in SQL is used to combine the result sets of two or more SELECT queries into a single result set. The operation eliminates duplicate records and, for the UNION to work, the SELECT statements must have the same number of columns with similar data types.</span></p><blockquote><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Syntax</strong></b><br><br><span>SELECT column1, column2, ...</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>FROM table1</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>UNION</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>SELECT column1, column2, ...</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>FROM table2;</span></p></blockquote><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Example</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Imagine two tables, TableA and TableB, with similar columns: ID and Name.</span></p><blockquote><p dir="ltr"><span>SELECT ID, Name FROM TableA</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>UNION</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>SELECT ID, Name FROM TableB;</span></p></blockquote><p dir="ltr"><span>This will return all unique ID and Name pairs from both tables combined.</span><br></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Types of Union</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Union All</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>By default, UNION removes duplicate rows from the result. If you want to keep all rows from both tables, use UNION ALL.</span></p><blockquote><p dir="ltr"><span>SELECT column1, column2, ...</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>FROM table1</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>UNION ALL</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>SELECT column1, column2, ...</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>FROM table2;</span></p></blockquote><p dir="ltr"><span>Use-Cases for Union</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Data Consolidation: When you have similar types of data spread across different tables or even databases.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Reporting: Create comprehensive reports that need to pull similar data from multiple tables.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Data Analysis: Useful in analytical operations where data from different sources needs to be examined together.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Advantages and Disadvantages</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Advantages</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Simplicity: Unions can simplify complex queries by separating them into smaller, more manageable subqueries.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Performance: Can be faster than joins for combining datasets, especially when dealing with indexed columns.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Flexibility: Offers a lot of flexibility by allowing you to combine data from multiple tables.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Disadvantages</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Data Type Mismatch: All corresponding columns must have the same data type.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Column Number: The number of columns in each SELECT query must be the same.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Duplicates: UNION eliminates duplicates, which may or may not be desirable depending on the context.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Best Practices</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Column Matching: Always make sure that corresponding columns have the same data type and are in the same order in all SELECT statements.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Use Aliases: If column names differ, use aliases to ensure that the result set has consistent column names.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><span>Optimization: Use UNION ALL when you are sure that there will be no duplicates or when duplicates don't matter, as it is faster than UNION.</span></p><p dir="ltr"><b><strong>Summary</strong></b></p><p dir="ltr"><span>The UNION clause in SQL is a powerful tool that allows for the combination of multiple result sets into a single, unified dataset. Whether you're consolidating data, generating reports, or performing complex analyses, UNION can make your SQL queries more effective and your database more versatile. With a good understanding of how UNION works, you can manipulate sets of data records with ease, bringing you one step closer to mastering SQL.</span></p></div><div class="track_mark_as_read_btn__qp09Q g-mt-5"><button class="ui green disabled button" disabled="" tabindex="-1">Marked as Read</button></div></div>
